The Legal and Administrative Framework to Support Markets on First Nation Lands - A Research Proposal from the Tulo Centre of Indigenous Economics 
Research Partnership Background
Over the last 14 years, the Indian and North Affairs Canada’s Strategic Research and Analysis Directorate (SRAD) and the Indian Taxation Advisory Board (ITAB), the predecessor to the First Nations Tax Commission (FNTC) formed a partnership to conduct research into First Nation economic development.  The partnership was formed to pursue the common objective of all parties – to help First Nations build the capacity necessary to support markets and private investment on First Nation lands and enhance First Nation self sufficiency.  The FNTC formed a partnership with the Tulo Centre of Indigenous Economics (Tulo) and Thompson Rivers University (TRU) to help build capacity and provide university accredited training to First Nations interested in facilitating investment on their lands.  Last year, Tulo proposed to establish a research partnership with SRAD to support Tulo-TRU curriculum development for accredited courses in First Nation applied economics, provide expertise for course delivery and advance a First Nation investment focussed research agenda.
Research Rationale
This proposed research is intended to serve the interests of Canada, the Tulo Centre of Indigenous Economics and First Nations. 
First, this proposed research supports the recently released Federal Framework for Aboriginal Economic Development (FFAED).  The FFAED identified both legal and administrative issues as principle barriers to investment on First Nation lands.  This research would provide a systematic overview of these issues and further inform federal policies and programs to implement the FFAED. 
Second, the Tulo-TRU certificate in First Nation Applied Economics offers APEC 265 – Facilitating Investment on First Nation Lands.  This content of this course would be enhanced by a research paper discussing the theory, practices, and evidence that support establishing the legal and administrative framework to facilitate investment. 
Finally, First Nations interested in facilitating investment on their lands would benefit from this research.  It could save them time and resources in establishing the legal framework and administrative capacity that is required to meet their economic development objectives. 
Research Premise
The research supports the premise in the FFAED that the Indian Act has prevented First Nations from establishing the laws and administrative practices the support markets on First Nations lands.  In this regard, a number of recent pieces of legislation – the First Nation Fiscal and Statistical Management Act, the First Nations Land Management Act and the First Nations Commercial and Industrial Development Act provide substantial tools for First Nations to begin to create these laws and administrative practices.  A policy agenda for First Nations that want to fill these legal and administrative gaps using this new legislation in a matter that reduces transaction costs and supports markets has only been partially completed in previous FNTC-SRAD research.  This research would enhance previous SRAD research by focusing on the policy and law content elements of the required framework.    
Research Proposal and Work plan
The Tulo Centre will develop a research paper that specifies and identifies best practices for developing the legal and administrative practices to facilitate investment on First Nation lands.  It will consist of four parts. 
1.	Institutional Development Theory – The paper would briefly summarize the institutional economic theory that law and economic policy must work together to support markets.  This would introduce the subject of law and economics and the role of transaction cost analysis in developing laws and administrative systems.  It would also provide a framework for analyzing existing legal and administrative practices among First Nations.  The method will be a literature review with attention paid to First Nation relevance. 
2.	First Nation Law Making Powers – This section would compare the First Nation law making powers under recent legislation to those of other governments in Canada to determine the potential for First Nations to fill any legislative gaps.  Particular attention will be paid to laws intended to provide certainty of tenure, certainty to investors and clarity of development processes.  A comparative analysis will be completed and appropriate First Nation case studies based on this analysis will be identified.  
3.	Success Stories – This section will focus on the legal frameworks using recent legislation established by First Nations that have been successful in facilitating investment on their lands.  The content of the laws and that significantly reduce transaction costs will be noted by the legal researcher.  Administrative practices to support the implementation of these laws will be specified.  Empirical evidence will be gathered to establish these case studies as success stories for facilitating investment on First Nation lands. 
4.	Policy Implications – The final section of the paper will focus on two types of policy implications.  First it will describe some of the policy considerations in law and administrative development for First Nations interested in this approach to economic development.  Second, it will focus on some of the policy and program implications to support the implementation of the FFAED.
5.	Report Development – The research will be compiled into a draft report that will be reviewed by key stakeholders before a final draft is completed.   
Tulo will work with Fiscal Realities Economists, who have a great deal of experience in identifying the barriers to successful land development on First Nation lands and an appropriate legal researcher to complete this project. 
Budget
The table below summarizes the budget and work plan for this proposed research.  Research economists are assumed to be charged at $800/day, senior economists at $1000/day and senior legal researcher (a lawyer with a master’s degree) at $1200/day.
Research Budget Summary
 


