


The Tulo Education/Training Niche
The Tulo Centre of Indigenous Economics is a not-for-profit institution whose mission is to help interested First Nations build the legal, administration and infrastructure frameworks to support markets on their lands. Tulo is the Chinook word for profit. Chinook was an aboriginal trading language used between Alaska and California. 
The president of the Tulo Centre is Chief Mike Lebourdais. The other board members are Bud Smith (the former Attorney General of BC) and Dr. Robert Bish (Professor Emeritus, Economics and Public Administration, from UVIC). The director of the Tulo Centre is Andre Le Dressay (an adjunct TRU professor of Economics). Tulo was founded by Clarence T. (Manny) Jules, the Chief Commissioner of the First Nation Tax Commission.
The Tulo Board believes that First Nations must become more integrated into the Canadian federation and market system to provide fiscal and economic opportunities for First Nation governments and First Nation members.  During the past three decades there has been more progress toward these ends than since the adoption of the Indian Act in 1871.  There remains much to be done.  
Four premises form the foundation for the Tulo Centre mission:
1. An important cause of First Nation economic underdevelopment is that the costs of doing business on First Nation lands are at least four to six times higher than they are off First Nation lands.
2. These high costs of doing business are mainly a result of First Nations not developing the legal and administrative frameworks to support markets like the rest of Canada because the Indian Act has effectively froze First Nation institutional development for the last 140 years. 
3. Recent legislation such as the First Nations Fiscal and Statistical Management Act, the First Nations Land Management Act, the First Nations Commercial and Industrial Development Act and the proposed First Nation Property Ownership Act provide an opportunity for First Nations to create competitive markets on their lands, generate economic growth and raise their own revenues to achieve their community objectives. 
4. There is a demand from First Nations for practical training and accredited education on how to realize the economic benefits from recent First Nation legislation that few educational institutions are currently realizing. 
Existing Programs and Courses
The Tulo Centre currently delivers two certificate programs in partnership with Thompson Rivers University and the First Nations Tax Commission - an eight course 17 credit certificate in First Nation Tax Administration and a six course 18 credit certificate in First Nation Applied Economics. 
The focus of the tax administration certificate is to provide training for the development of an independent revenue base on First Nations.  An independent revenue base provides for the financing of infrastructure on FN lands and enables cooperation with adjacent local governments for the provision of services to FN and non-FN residents and businesses on reserves.  The Certificate in Applied Economics provides coursework on the economics of land and business development.
Each course in these certificate programs has the applied economics (APEC) designation. Twelve of the courses involve original curriculum only offered by Tulo-TRU that focuses on a specific First Nation legal, administrative, infrastructure or communications requirement to reduce the high costs of doing business on First Nation lands. The existing courses and certificates and summarized in the table below:
Current Tulo-TRU Certificates and Courses
Certificate in First Nation Tax Administration
Certificate in First Nation Applied Economics
APEC 161: Introduction to First Nations Taxation
ECON 122: Introduction to Basic Economics Or
ECON 190: Principles of Microeconomics Or
ECON 195: Principles of Macroeconomics
APEC 162: Establishing First Nations Tax Rates and Expenditures
ECON 181: Business, Professional, and Academic Composition 
APEC 163: Assessment and Assessment Appeal Procedures
APEC 263: Issues in Aboriginal Economics 

APEC 164: Tax Administration, Billing and Enforcement
APEC 264: Residential and Commercial Development on First Nation Lands 
 
APEC 165: Communications, Tax Payer Relations and Dispute Resolution
APEC 265 Investment Facilitation on First Nation Lands
 
APEC 166: Service Contracts and Joint Agreements
APEC 270 Economic Feasibility and Impact Analysis on First Nation Lands 
APEC 167: Development Cost Charges

APEC 168: Capital Infrastructure and Debenture Financing


During the last three years, the Tulo Center and TRU have worked together to develop curriculum and deliver 19 courses within the two certificate programs in both online and face to face formats. Appendix A contains a list of the Tulo courses delivered to date. 
Partnerships
The Tulo Centre maintains the following strategic partnerships (MOUs) to support its mission: 
* First Nations Tax Commission - Provides support and curriculum development for certificate in First Nation tax administration.
* Thompson Rivers University - Provides curriculum development support, accreditation, faculty and space to deliver current and future courses and programs.
* Consensus Building Institute (MIT-Harvard Public Disputes Program) - Supports case study, simulation and interest based negotiation curriculum development. 
* First Nation Tax Administrators Association - Evaluates curriculum and markets programs to 130 First Nations.
* First Nations Financial Management Board - Working to develop courses with Tulo and TRU to support financial management requirements of modern First Nation legislation. 
* Institute of Liberty and Democracy (Peru) - Working to develop curriculum to support indigenous property rights throughout the Americas.
* Property and Environment Research Centre (Montana) - Proposed joint research and workshops in support of text book on First Nation Applied Economics for use throughout North America. 
* Aboriginal and Northern Development Canada - Proposed curriculum for economic demographics to support applied economics program and support for research and curriculum materials. 
Vision
The Tulo Centre would like to develop a practical diploma in First Nation Applied Economics by laddering the existing certificates and adding courses on:
(a) First Nations Financial Management in partnership with the FNFMB.  First Nations wishing to engage in debt finance of infrastructure must have managers accredited by the FNFMB.  These courses would meet that requirement.
i. Introduction to FMB certification
ii. Introduction to FMB financial administration laws
iii. Other FMB courses
(b) First Nation economics and demographics in partnership with Aboriginal and Northern Development Canada.  These courses are in response to a specific request by ANDC, and they fit within the Tulo mission.
i. Introduction to First Nation administrative information management
ii. Introduction to Statistics
iii. Introduction to First Nation economics and demographics
(c) Interest based negotiations in partnership with CBI and the Harvard/MIT disputes program
i. Introduction to interest based negotiations
ii. First Nation natural resource negotiations
(d) First Nation law and economics in partnership with the FNTC, ILD and PERC
i. An introduction to law and economics
ii. First Nation property rights and legislation
iii. Economic considerations in First Nation laws
The Tulo Centre has begun to work with other potential partners to further expand applied course offerings in the areas of land management, land use planning and local government management.  These course offerings provide the basis for a First Nation emphasis within the Bachelor of Business Degree and possibly a new degree with more of a First Nation Management focus.  Such a degree could be based in Applied Economics but would be supplemented by other courses, especially those in law and economics, statistics, and policy analysis.  Other options may also emerge in the future, but it is the Tulo Centre objective to retain its focus on helping to integrate First Nations and their citizens into the Canadian market system. At this time we believe the School of Business will be the most appropriate within TRU.


Appendix A 
Tulo - TRU Courses Delivered to Date
1. May 9 to May 13, 2011 - APEC 1670: Development Cost Charges
2. March 7 to March 11, 2011 - APEC 1640: Administration: Tax Notices, Collection & Enforcement 
3. Jan 31 to Feb 4, 2011 - APEC 1660: Service Agreements and Joint Contracts 
4. Jan 15 to March 11, 2011 - APEC 1611 (Online): Introduction to First Nation Taxation 
5. Nov 29 to Dec 3,2010 - APEC 2650: Investment Facilitation on First Nation Lands 
6. Oct 4 to Oct 8,2010 - APEC 1650: Communications and Taxpayer Relations 
7. September 27, 2010 - APEC 1631 (Online): Assessment and Assessment Appeals 
8. September 20, 2010 - APEC 1621 (Online): Establishing First Nation Tax Rates & Expenditures 
9. Aug 30 to Sept 3, 2010 - APEC 1630: Assessment and Assessment Appeals 
10. June 7 to June 11 - APEC 1640: Administration: Tax Notices, Collection & Enforcement 
11. March 29, 2010 - APEC 1611 (Online): Introduction to First Nation Tax Administration 
12. February 15 to 19, 2010 - ECON 2640: Commercial and Residential Development on First Nation Lands 
13. February 8, 2010 - APEC 1621 (Online): Establishing First Nation Tax Rates and Expenditures 
14. November 22, 2009 - ECON 2631 (Online): Issues in Aboriginal Economics 
15. November 22, 2009 - APEC 1611 (Online): Introduction to First Nation Tax Administration 
16. November 18 to 22, 2008 - APEC 1630: Assessment and Assessment Appeals 
17. November 4 to 8, 2008 - APEC 1620: Establishing First Nation Tax Rates & Expenditures 
18. October 14 to 18, 2008 - APEC 1610: Introduction to First Nation Tax Administration 
19. March 25 to 29, 2008 - APEC 1610: Introduction to First Nation Tax Administration  
Tulo Centre of Indigenous Economics		2 	





